(popping) (upbeat music) Traditionally in computation
and processing data we would bring the data to the computer. You'd wanna program and you'd bring the data into the program. In a big data cluster what Larry Page and Sergey Brin came up with is very simple is they took the data and they sliced it into pieces and they distributed each and they replicated each piece or triplicated each piece and they would send it the pieces of these files to thousands of computers first it was hundreds but
then now it's thousands now it's tens of thousands. And then they would send the same program to all these computers in the cluster. And each computer would run the program on its little piece of the file and send the results back. The results would then be sorted and those results would
then be redistributed back to another process. The first process is called
a map or a mapper process and the second one was
called a reduce process. Fairly simple concepts but turned out that you could do lots and lots of different kinds of handle lots and lots of
different kinds of problems and very, very, very large data sets. So the one thing that's nice
about these big data clusters is they scale linearly. You had twice as many servers and you get twice the performance and you can handle twice
the amount of data. So this was just broke a bottleneck for all the major social media companies. Yahoo then got on board. Yahoo hired someone named Doug Cutting who had been working on a clone or a copy of the Google big data architecture and now that's called Hadoop. And if you google Hadoop you'll see that it's now a very popular term and there are many, many, many if you look at the big data ecology there are hundreds of thousands
of companies out there that have some kind of footprint in the big data world. (music) Most of the components of data
science have been around for many, many, many decades. But they're all coming together now with some new nuances I guess. At the bottom of data science you see probability and statistics. You see algebra, linear algebra you see programming and you see databases. They've all been here. But what's happened now is we now have the computational capabilities to apply some new techniques
- machine learning. Where now we can take really large data sets and instead of taking a sample and trying to test some hypothesis we can take really, really large data sets and look for patterns. And so back off one level
from hypothesis testing to finding patterns that maybe
will generate hypotheses. Now this can bother some very
traditional statisticians and gets them really annoyed sometimes that you know you're
supposed to have a hypothesis that is not that is
independent of the data and then you test it. So once some of these machine
learning techniques started were really the only thing the only way you can analyze some of these really large social media data sets. So what we've seen is that the combination of traditional areas computer science probability, statistics, mathematics all coming together in
this thing that we call Decision Sciences. Our department at Stern I'll give a little plug here we happen to have been very well situated among business schools because we're one of
the few business schools that has a real statistics department with real PhD level statisticians in it. We have an operations
management department and an information systems department. So we have a wide range
of computer scientists to statisticians, to
operations researchers. And so we were perfectly positioned as a couple of other business schools were to jump on this bandwagon and say; okay this is Decision Sciences. And Foster Provost who's
in my department was the first director of the
NYU Center for Data Science. (music) Four years ago maybe five years ago. I mean, I feel this is one of those cases where you can just to Google and search for data science and see how often it occurred and you'll see almost nothing and then just a spike. The same thing you would see with big data about seven or eight years ago. So data science is a
term I haven't heard of probably five years ago. (music) The first question is what is it? And I think faculty and everybody is still trying to get their hands around exactly what is business analytics and
what is data science. We certainly know the components of it. But it's morphing and
changing and growing. I mean the last three years deep learning has just
been added into the mix. Neural networks have been
around for 20 or 30 years. 20 years ago I would teach
neural networks in a class and you really couldn't
do very much with them. And now some researchers have come up with multi-layer neural networks in Toronto in particular
the University of Toronto. And that technology is
now rapidly expanding it's being used by Google, by
Facebook, by lots of companies. (music)